# HTTPX 1.0

The `httpx` 1.0 release includes a number of API changes intended to present a simpler, more consistent interface throughout.

If you're migrating from previous versions, you'll need to be aware of the following:

## Simplified transport configuration

* The `verify` and `cert` arguments no longer exist. Use `ssl_context = httpx.SSLContext(verify=..., cert=...)` instead. See [the SSL documentation](#) for details.
* The `http1` and `http2` arguments no longer exist. Use `version = httpx.Version("HTTP/1.1", "HTTP/2")` instead. See [the HTTP version documentation](#) for details.
* The `proxies` argument no longer exists. Use `proxy = httpx.Proxy(...)` instead. See [the Proxy documentation](#) for details.
* The `retries`, `local_address`, `socket_options`, and `uds` arguments no longer exist. Use `network_options = httpx.NetworkOptions(...)` instead. See [the Network Options documentation](#) for details.
* The `app = ...` shortcut no longer exists. Use `transport = httpx.WSGITransport()` or `transport = httpx.ASGITransport()` instead. See [the Transport documentation](#) for details.
* The `mounts = ...` argument no longer exists. Use `transport = httpx.Mounts()` or `transport = httpx.AsyncMounts()` instead. See [the Transport documentation](#) for details.
* The `trust_env` argument no longer exists, and no environment variables are used by default. See the "Environment Variables" section below for more details.

## Stricter parameters

* The `auth = <callable>` and `auth = (username, password)` shortcuts are no longer supported. Use an explict auth class instead, such as `auth = httpx.BasicAuth(username, password)`.
* The `timeout = <float|None>` shortcut is no longer supported. Use an explicit `timeout = httpx.Timeout(...)` configuration instead. To disable timeouts use an explicit `timeout = httpx.Timeout(None)`.
* The `proxy = <str>` shortcut is no longer supported. Use an explicit `proxy = httpx.Proxy(...)` configuration instead.

## Minor cleanups

* All components on `httpx.URL` instances now return `str` ...

* The `Response.elapsed` property no longer exists. Usage of event hooks can provide this functionality if required. See [the Event Hooks](documentation) for details.

## Environment variables

* The `SSL_CERT_FILE`, `SSL_CERT_DIR` and `SSLKEYLOGFILE` environment variables are no longer automatically used, See [the SSL documentation](#) for details one how apply them.
* `HTTPS_PROXY`, `HTTP_PROXY`, `ALL_PROXY` and `NO_PROXY` are no longer automatically used. Use `transport = httpx.Mount(use_proxy_env=True)` or `transport = httpx.AsyncMount(use_proxy_env=True)` 

## Dependencies

* `httpx` now has a lighter dependancy install footprint, and does not install the async variant by default. Use `pip install "httpx[asyncio]"` or `pip install "httpx[trio]"` for async support.

## Versioning

* From `1.0` onwards, `httpx` can be expected to follow the [SEMVER versioning policy](#).